docs: adding doc for pubsub (#2808)
open-policy-agent/gatekeeper: website/docs/pubsub.md

---
id: pubsub
title: Pubsub
---

`Feature State`: Gatekeeper version v3.13+ (alpha)

> ❗ This feature is still in alpha stage, so the final form can still change (feedback is welcome!).

## Motivation

> Prior to this feature, there were two ways to get audit violations. One is to look at constraints status and the other is to look at audit pod logs and get the logged audit violations. Both of these approach have limitations as described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to this feature, there were two ways to get audit violations. One is to look at constraints status and the other is to look at audit pod logs to get the logged audit violations. Both of these approaches have limitations as described below.
```

Limitations of getting audit violations from constraint status:

> - To reduce in memory consumption of audit and avoid violating etcd limit of 1.5MB per resource, gatekeeper only reports up-to 500 violations on constraint template. In other words, one might not get all the violations from looking at constraint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To reduce in-memory consumption of Gatekeeper audit pod and to avoid hitting the etcd limit of 1.5MB per resource, gatekeeper recommends configuring a limit up-to 500 violations on constraint template. As a result, it’s possible that not all the violations are reported as part of the constraint status.
```

Limitations of getting audit violations from audit logs:

> - It could be difficult to parse audit logs and look for violation messages as violation logs would be scrambled together with other log statements. Additionally, when there are huge number of violations, the pod logs might get pruned and it might not be possible to get the logs for whole audit. In other words, it is possible to look at logs to fetch audit violation and still not get all the violations that were caught during audit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It could be difficult to parse audit pod logs to look for violation messages, as violation logs would be scrambled together with other log statements. Additionally, when there are huge number of violations, it’s possible to miss part of the log as the pod logs get rotated. As a result, it is possible to look at logs to fetch audit violation and still not get all the violations that were caught during audit.
```

> This feature that uses publish and subscribe model, allows Gatekeeper to export audit violations over a broker that can be consumed by a subscriber independently. Therefore, it allows users to get all the audit violations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature uses publish and subscribe model that allows Gatekeeper to export audit violations over a broker that can be consumed by a subscriber independently. Therefore, it allows users to get all the audit violations.
```

- `config` field in `configMap.data` is a json data that allows users to pass appropriate information to establish connection to use respective provider.

**Note:** As of now, only Dapr driver is available to use and hence an example of pubsub set up with Dapr is described below.

### Quick start with publishing violations using Dapr and Redis

#### Prerequisites

1. Install Dapr

    ```
    helm repo add dapr https://dapr.github.io/helm-charts/
    helm upgrade --install dapr dapr/dapr --version=1.10 --namespace dapr-system --create-namespace --wait --debug
    ```

    To install dapr with specific requirements and configuration, please refer to [dapr docs](https://docs.dapr.io/getting-started/). 
    
    > Dapr is installed with mtls enabled by default, for more details on the same plaase refer to [dapr security](https://docs.dapr.io/operations/security/mtls/#setting-up-mtls-with-the-configuration-resource).

2. Install Redis

    ```
    helm repo add bitnami https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami
    helm upgrade --install redis bitnami/redis --namespace default --set image.tag=7.0-debian-11 --wait --debug
    ```

>     > To install redis with TLS, please refer to [this](https://docs.bitnami.com/kubernetes/infrastructure/redis-cluster/administration/enable-tls/) doc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    > To install Redis with TLS, please refer to [this](https://docs.bitnami.com/kubernetes/infrastructure/redis-cluster/administration/enable-tls/) doc.
```

#### Configure a fake subscriber to receive violations

1. Create `fake-subscriber` namespace and redis secret

```
kubectl create ns fake-subscriber
kubectl get secret redis --namespace=default -o yaml | sed 's/namespace: .*/namespace: fake-subscriber/' | kubectl apply -f -
```

2. Create Dapr pubsub component
```
kubectl apply -f <<EOF
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: pubsub
  namespace: fake-subscriber
spec:
  type: pubsub.redis
  version: v1
  metadata:
  - name: redisHost
    value: redis-master.default.svc.cluster.local:6379
  - name: redisPassword
    secretKeyRef: 
      name: redis
      key: redis-password
```
> Please use [this guide](https://docs.dapr.io/reference/components-reference/supported-state-stores/setup-redis/) to properly configure redis pubsub component for Dapr.

3. Deploy subscriber application

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

    spec:
      containers:
      - name: go-sub
        image: fake-subscriber:latest
        imagePullPolicy: Never
```
**Note:** Dockerfile to build image for fake-subscriber is under [gatekeeper/test/fake-subscriber](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper/tree/master/test/pubsub/fake-subscriber). You can find make rule to build and deploy subscriber in [Makefile](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper/blob/master/Makefile) under name `e2e-subscriber-build-load-image` and `e2e-subscriber-deploy`.

#### Configure Gatekeeper with Pubsub enabled

1. Create Dapr pubsub component and redis secret in `gatekeeper-system` (i.e. the namespace where gatekeeper will be installed).

```
kubectl get secret redis --namespace=default -o yaml | sed 's/namespace: .*/namespace: gatekeeper-system/' | kubectl apply -f -
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: pubsub
  namespace: gatekeeper-system
spec:
  type: pubsub.redis
  version: v1
  metadata:
  - name: redisHost
    value: redis-master.default.svc.cluster.local:6379
  - name: redisPassword
    secretKeyRef:
      name: redis
      key: redis-password
EOF
```

> 2. Install gatekeeper with `--enable-pub-sub` set to `true`, `--audit-connection` set to `audit`, `--audit-channel` set to `audit` on audit pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Install Gatekeeper with `--enable-pub-sub` set to `true`, `--audit-connection` set to `audit`, `--audit-channel` set to `audit` on audit pod.
```

**Note:** Verify that after the audit pod is running there is a dapr sidecar injected and running along side `manager` container.

3. Create connection config to establish a connection.

```
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: audit
  namespace: gatekeeper-system
data:
  provider: "dapr"
  config: |
    {
      "component": "pubsub"
    }
EOF
```

> **Note:** Name of the connection configMap must match the value of `--audit-connection` for it to be used by audit to publish violation. Hence, right now only one connection config can exists for audit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** Name of the connection configMap must match the value of `--audit-connection` for it to be used by audit to publish violation. At this time, only one connection config can exists for audit.
```

> 4. Create the constraint templates and constraints, and let the audit run it's course.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Create the constraint templates and constraints, and make sure audit ran by checking ....
```

> Finally, check the subscriber logs to see the violations received.

Reviewer 2: can we add an example here

---
id: pubsub
title: Consuming violations using Pubsub
---

`Feature State`: Gatekeeper version v3.13+ (alpha)

> ❗ This feature is alpha, subject to change (feedback is welcome!).

## Description

This feature pushes audit violations to a pubsub service. Users can subscribe to pubsub service to consume violations.

> To gain insights into different methods of obtaining audit violations and the respective trade-offs for each approach, please refer to [Reading Audit Results](audit.md#reading-audit-results).

## Enabling Gatekeeper to export audit violations

Install prerequisites such as a pubsub tool, a message broker etc.

### Setting up audit with pubsub enabled

In the audit deployment, set the `--enable-pub-sub` flag to `true` to publish audit violations. Additionally, `--audit-connection` and `--audit-channel` flags must be set to allow audit to publish violations. `--audit-connection` must be set to the name of the connection config, and `--audit-channel` must be set to name of the channel where violations should get published.

> Create a connection configMap that supplies [predefined set of configurations](pubsub-driver-walkthrough.md#how-to-use-different-providers) for a connection to get established. For instance, to establish a connection that uses Dapr to publish messages this configMap is appropriate:

Reviewer 3: "that supplies predefined set of configurations" -> "that supplies a provider-specific configuration"

    secretKeyRef: 
      name: redis
      key: redis-password
```
> Please use [this guide](https://docs.dapr.io/reference/components-reference/supported-state-stores/setup-redis/) to properly configure Redis pubsub component for Dapr.

3. Deploy subscriber application
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: sub
  namespace: fake-subscriber
  labels:
    app: sub
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: sub
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: sub
      annotations:
        dapr.io/enabled: "true"
        dapr.io/app-id: "subscriber"
        dapr.io/enable-api-logging: "true"
        dapr.io/app-port: "6002"
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: go-sub
        image: fake-subscriber:latest
        imagePullPolicy: Never
```
**Note:** Dockerfile to build image for fake-subscriber is under [gatekeeper/test/fake-subscriber](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper/tree/master/test/pubsub/fake-subscriber). You can find make rule to build and deploy subscriber in [Makefile](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper/blob/master/Makefile) under name `e2e-subscriber-build-load-image` and `e2e-subscriber-deploy`.

> #### Configure Gatekeeper with Pubsub enabled

Reviewer: Could these steps be done with helm chart install or update by passing the required values as helm chart values parameters?

Author: I added command to install `gatekeeper` with helm. 

Do we want to include pubsub component that needs to be created in step 1 in our charts as well? IMO I am not sure including something for quickstart should be added to helm charts.

Reviewer: > Do we want to include pubsub component that needs to be created in step 1 in our charts as well?

No

---
id: pubsub
title: Pubsub
---

> 

Reviewer 2: can we add that this is alpha? something like this https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper/blob/0484f99d8857f38ef9338624c155fef5d34588da/website/docs/externaldata.md?plain=1#L8

kind: Component
metadata:
  name: pubsub
  namespace: gatekeeper-system
spec:
  type: pubsub.redis
  version: v1
  metadata:
  - name: redisHost
    value: redis-master.default.svc.cluster.local:6379
  - name: redisPassword
    secretKeyRef:
      name: redis
      key: redis-password
EOF
```

2. Install gatekeeper with `--enable-pub-sub` set to `true`, `--audit-connection` set to `audit`, `--audit-channel` set to `audit` on audit pod.

**Note:** Verify that after the audit pod is running there is a dapr sidecar injected and running along side `manager` container.

3. Create connection config to establish a connection.

```
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: audit
  namespace: gatekeeper-system
data:
  provider: "dapr"
  config: |
    {
      "component": "pubsub"
    }
EOF
```
**Note:** Name of the connection configMap must match the value of `--audit-connection` for it to be used by audit to publish violation. Hence, right now only one connection config can exists for audit.

4. Create the constraint templates and constraints, and let the audit run it's course.

Finally, check the subscriber logs to see the violations received.

> ## Pubsub interface and Driver walk through

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if these should be in the user-facing docs since these are more dev facing, i am not sure what's the best place to move these though

Author: Yeah, I agree. I could not find an appropriate location to add this information.

Author: added a page under `Contribute` that describes interface details

---
id: pubsub
title: Consuming violations using Pubsub
---

`Feature State`: Gatekeeper version v3.13+ (alpha)

> ❗ This feature is alpha, subject to change (feedback is welcome!).

## Motivation

Prior to this feature, there were two ways to get audit violations. One is to look at constraints status and the other is to look at audit pod logs to get the logged audit violations. Both of these approaches have limitations as described below.

Limitations of getting audit violations from constraint status:

- To reduce in-memory consumption of Gatekeeper audit pod and to avoid hitting [default etcd limit](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.5/dev-guide/limit/#request-size-limit) of 1.5MB per resource, gatekeeper recommends configuring a [limit up-to 500 violations](https://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/website/docs/audit/#configuring-audit)(by default 20) on constraint template. Because of these limitations, users might not get all the violations from a Constraint resource.

> Limitations of getting audit violations from audit logs:

Reviewer 3: To give users a fair assessment of options, we should also list the limits/challenges of using pubsub

> - It could be difficult to parse audit pod logs to look for violation messages, as violation logs would be mixed together with other log statements. Additionally, when there are huge number of violations, it’s possible to miss part of the log as the pod logs get rotated.

Reviewer 3: >  Additionally, when there are huge number of violations, it’s possible to miss part of the log as the pod logs get rotated.

This is making assumptions about a users' logging infrastructure that may not be accurate.

> This feature uses publish and subscribe (pubsub) model that allows Gatekeeper to export audit violations over a broker that can be consumed by a subscriber independently. Therefore, it allows users to get all the audit violations.

Reviewer 3: "get all the violations" oversells its capabilities, there is always the possibility a violation can be dropped due to pubsub being down.

In reality, this mostly contrasts with violations from status. I'd say something like: "pubsub violations are not subject to reporting limits" or similar.

## Enabling Gatekeeper to export audit violations

Install prerequisites such as a pubsub tool, a message broker etc.

### Setting up audit with pubsub enabled

In the audit deployment, set the `--enable-pub-sub` flag to `true` to publish audit violations. Additionally, `--audit-connection` and `--audit-channel` flags must be set to allow audit to publish violations. `--audit-connection` must be set to the name of the connection config, and `--audit-channel` must be set to name of the channel where violations should get published.

> Create a connection configMap that supplies appropriate set of configurations for a connection to get established. For instance, to establish a connection that uses Dapr to publish messages this configMap is appropriate:

Reviewer 3: How does a user know that an "appropriate set of configurations" is? Where can they get more information about what config knobs are available and what they look like?

Author: "Set of configurations" is going to be different for each provider. The example of what the configuration looks like for Dapr is listed below.

Reviewer 3: Right. As worded, does the user know they need to look to the provider's documentation to figure out what an appropriate config looks like?

Author: Updated to add a link to provider's documentation

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:

>   name: audit

Reviewer 3: We should call this something more specific than "audit" for clarity.

If you didn't know this feature existed and you saw a config map named "audit" in your cluster, what would you assume it did?

  namespace: gatekeeper-system
data:
  provider: "dapr"
  config: |
    {
      "component": "pubsub"
    }
```

> - `provider` field in `configMap.data` determined which tool/driver should be used to establish a connection. Valid values are: `dapr`

Reviewer 3: "determined" -> "determines"

`configMap.data` is not a path. `data.provider` if you want to fully qualify it, though I'd just drop this portion (same below)

> - `config` field in `configMap.data` is a json data that allows users to pass appropriate information to establish connection to use respective provider.

Reviewer 3: "is a json data" -> "is a json object"

"is a json data that allows users to pass appropriate information to establish connection to use respective provider." -> "is a json object that configures how the connection is made. E.g. which queue messages should be sent to."

#### Available Pubsub drivers
Dapr: https://dapr.io/

### Violations

The audit pod publishes violations in following format:

```json
{
  "id": "2023-07-18T21:21:52Z",
  "details": {
    "missing_labels": [
      "test"
    ]
  },
  "eventType": "violation_audited",
  "group": "constraints.gatekeeper.sh",
  "version": "v1beta1",
  "kind": "K8sRequiredLabels",
  "name": "pod-must-have-test",
  "message": "you must provide labels: {\"test\"}",
  "enforcementAction": "deny",
  "resourceAPIVersion": "v1",
  "resourceKind": "Pod",
  "resourceNamespace": "nginx",
  "resourceName": "nginx-deployment-cd55c47f5-2b84x",
  "resourceLabels": {
    "app": "nginx",
    "pod-template-hash": "cd55c47f5"
  }
}
```

> ### Quick start with publishing violations using Dapr and Redis

Reviewer 3: Do we want to take responsibility for making sure that this documentation remains current? What if Dapr and/or Redis change their installation methods? Should we just point users to Dapr's docs if they need a reference installation?

TBH if we wan't to have a "quick start" guide, I'd use something other than Dapr, since there would be less to install, and therefore less things to break. Maybe use Redis directly, as an example (though I still wouldn't want to own the accuracy of installation instructions for a 3rd party product).

Author: I am fine with pointing to just dapr docs. 

@sozercan @ritazh thoughts?
